---
layout: post
title: "A primer on non-equilibrium statistical physics Part III, Some Non-Equilibrium Examples"
date: 2019-04-10
tags: statistical-mechanics non-equilibrium-series examples verbose
--- 

Before moving on to general results in non-equilibrium theory, I would like to list out a number of concrete examples illustrating the concept of non-equilibrium and its scope, too. In the process, I intend to point out some of the subtleties involves in identifying non-equilibrium stationary states. The examples will come both from real systems and toy models, from physics but also more abstract contexts.

Let's start with the dear ol' piston. Consider a gas enclosed in diathermal insulating walls so that energy is exchanged while the number of molecules remains the same. At equilibrium the gas takes the temperature of the environment $T$ and the piston sits still with the pressure on the two sides being equal. Specifying $(V, N, T)$, the canonical ensemble describes the distribution of the microstates inside the walls.

Now push on the piston so as to compress the gas until you reach a new reduced volume $V'$. The way you push on the piston matters in general. Even if you compress always up to the same $V'$, different physical phenomena would occur depending on whether you compress the gas fast or slow for instance. Push it fast enough and even if the gas is coupled to a thermal reservoir, it would heat up and locally reach a much higher temperature than the surrounding (so that you can even set on fire pieces of materials inserted inside the gas and [this video](<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4qe1Ueifekg>) is a cool demonstration of this phenomenon). This is because a fast push translates into higher kinetic energy of the gas molecules which does get dissipated into the environment through the diathermal walls eventually, but the dissipation process takes time and transiently the molecules occupy higher energy levels. Everything during the compression and right after is already an example of a non-equilibrium situation.

Let's keep going. Eventually the system settles into a new equilibrium given by the canonical ensemble $(V', N, T)$. In order to maintain this macrostate, you need to keep pushing on the piston of course. If you stop pushing, the current macrostate $(V', N, T)$ is not equilibrium anymore and the gas will expand back to the original volume $V$ moving the piston up in the process.<sup>[1](#myfootnote1)</sup> During such expansion, the system is said to relax to equilibrium and such relaxation is of course a non-equilibrium phenomenon. Though relaxation is often said to be the most boring non-equilibrium situation, in fact sometimes the system encounter meta-stable states during relaxation, ie, $P(X, t)$ is evolving, but very slowly so that for our timescale of interest you have a stationary state $P_ss(X)$ that cannot obey detailed balance (that is the unique true equilibrium state) so that you effectivelly have a non-equilibrium stationary state. In the following we'll consider some examples of that.

After relaxation, we are back to the original equilibrium state. Now let's do something different: let's move periodically the piston up and down (think of a sinuisoidal function describing the displacement of the piston). The system becomes _driven_. Because it is periodically driven, the system will settle into  a non-equilibrium stationary state. I would argue that such out-of-equilibrium situation or such idealization of it is what gets most people actually excited. A typical non-equilibrium system $S$ is coupled to the environment $E$, like most thermodynamic system, but also to one or multiple drives $\lambda(t)$ (these are ultimately part of the environment of course, but it does make sense to think of them as third entity for the sake of conceptual clarity). Such drives will be particular physical systems, but regardless what they do in practice is to change in a time-dependent manner some parameters of our system and the $\lambda(t)$. In the case of the piston, it is the volume that change periodically influencing the dynamics.

These drives come into many different flavors. A simple toy model example allowing some analytical calculations is the two-temperature 1-D Ising model. A common version of this model start from heat bath dynamics. At each step, a spin $s$ is picked at random from the chain. The new value of this spin $\sigma_s$ is extracted from the following probability $P(\sigma_s) \propto \mathrm{exp}[\beta_s \sigma_s h(\sigma_{s-1}, \sigma_{s+1})]$ with $h(\sigma_{s-1}, \sigma_{s+1})$ being the local field $J(\sigma_{s-1} + \sigma_{s+1})$ made up by the neighboring spins. The weird bit is the spatial dependence of the temperature $\beta_s$, ie, some spins are coupled to one thermal reservois, some spins to another. Effectively there is a net energy flow going through the system, from the cold spins to the hot spins. With that said, I don't think it's quite obvious to see right away that detailed balance is actually broken here but this is what actually happens.

Another popular toy model is the TASEP, ie, totally asymetric simple exclusion process. Particles hop in a one-dimensional lattice in the following way: they can hop only on the right and they do so with a certain rate only if their neighboring right site isn't occupied. In addition, particles enter on the left-border of the lattice with rate $\alpha$ and exit at the right border with rate $\beta$. If $\alpha \neq \beta$, a net particle flow occurs and non-trivial density profiles and a rich structure in the phase diagram appear. The drive here is the source (or sink) of particles coming into (out of) the system.

Let us know consider a particular cool example of what can happen during the relaxation phase of a system. Imagine melting a magnetic material and the freezing it very fast. In this case, what can happen is that the atoms remain _frozen_ in disordered positions, like a a liquid or a glass. Since the magnetic coupling between the spin depends on the distance between the atoms and such atoms aren't in a regular crystal lattice anymore, each spin pair has a specic coupling and thanks to quantum-mechanics even the sign of this coupling may change, ie, some pair act ferromagnetically and some act antiferromagnetically. Obviously, ultimately the atoms are also diffusing and looking to arrange themselves into a lattice but the timescales involved are much greater than the observation times and the equilibration times of the spin variables. The system is out-of-equilibrium while being able to reach stationary for all practical purposes.

Locally irreversible moves always produce non-equilibrium system. If $X \rightarrow X'$ is allowed at a certain rate but $X' \rightarrow X$, it is immediate to use Kolmogorov's criterion to rule out detailed balance. Consider any loop starting from $X$ going to $X'$ and then going back to X with a series of steps. Going round the loop in the opposite direction is impossible and therefore detailed is not satisfied. Note that even if a direct transition $X' \rightarrow X$ is forbidden, a series of steps connecting $X$ to $X'$ are entirely possible. Local irreversibility does not imply global irreversibility. 

<a name="myfootnote1">1</a>: Occasionally you might have played around with some syringes and it might have happened to you that once you've pushed it down, it remained there even once you removed your finger from the plunger. In that case, the walls weren't really insulating of course, ie, $N$ didn't remain constant. As you pushed down, some air flowed out of the barrel. Once you stopped pushing, you weren't in $(V', N, T)$ but rather in some $(V', N', T)$ and therefore the system didn't need to return to the original volume.