---
layout: post
title: "Noise in biology"
tags: the-signal-and-the-noise biology physical-limits
---

This draft contains a list of basic facts about noise in biology and a list of which phenomena are particularly affected by it.

It might seem somewhat surprising that the problem of noise in biology has attracted so much attention only in the last 20 years and of course part of the reason that is surprising is that it isn't true. Monod spoke of chance and necessity about 50 years ago; evolutionary biologists have long worried about random drift and stochastic forces; Berg and Purcell published their seminal work in biophysics over 40 years ago. Theoretically, it is just obvious that if living systems are nothing more than bags of molecules dancing together, randomness will play a huge part in the way they shape up as and everybody who's a little familiar with statistical physics and the entropy vs energy framework will be be able to tell you that. It is true though that there has been a flood of papers recently and the reason for that is a new generation of experiments allowing for single-cell measurements and this type of data is absolutely essential to understand noise for the laws of probability require many nearly-identical systems to uncover patterns of stochastic nature. It seems that the field has exploded in the early '00 with the paper from Elowitz and Swain.

Why is noise interesting? 

1. Honestly, the first reason is probably simply its ubiquiteness. It affects nearly every biological process while so many topics in biology seem incredibly system-specific and physicists don't like that.
1. It connects to the problem of phenotypic difference given identical genotype. Note also that it's entirely possible that random events cumulate enhancing even more phenotypical difference.
1. Functionally, noise can have both positive or negative effects. Noise increases variability which can be beneficial as a form of bet-hedging, while on the other hand it may be an impediment to reliable behavior. Being able to tune it makes us able to cause both effects.
1. In particular, phenotypical variability is good for bacteria fighting medical treatment; in this case you'd like to have noise reduced in bacteria.
1. There is a clear rationale for using stochastic gene expression to create a diversity of phenotypes, namely that isogenic populations of viruses, bacteria and yeast cannot display heterogeneity in any other way. However, in many higher eukaryotes, population diversity largely arises from genetic and environmental diversity, making the argument for utilizing stochastic gene expression less plausible.

Some basic fact:

1. Living cells possess very low copy numbers of many components such as specific genes or transcription factors (~100). Thus, stochastic effects on the phenotype are pronounced. Why such low copy numbers?
1. The mean expression level of a protein is achievable in different ways and in particular proteins may have identical mean but very different noise levels.
1. Intrinsic vs extrinsic noise in gene expression: intrinsic noise is due to the biochemical process of gene expression only, following the dogma and its physical limits; extrinsic noise is due to differences in global physiological properties of the cell, eg, size influencing the search problem. In theory, you could imagine cells perfecly identical globally but gene expression levels still varying from cell to cell. This remaining noise is extrinsic noise. Notice the Elowitz et all consider _any_ variation in copy numbers as extrinsic noise; even if two cells had exactly the same amount of polymerase, transcription factor and regulatory proteins, noise would still be there because of the random microscopic determining expression levels. Now this is not quite I think in a true infinite limit; intrinsic noise does depend on the magnitude of copy numbers after all, but as we said it seems that such copy numbers are quite often rather low.
1. Note that intrinsic noise often does depend on the specific gene/protein being expressed as presumable the specific sequence affects the binding process in different ways. 
1. Elowitz and Swain have come with an experimental and theoretical way of distinguishing the two sources of noise. Formally, the noise is relative noise, ie, the standard deviation of the expression level in a population of cells divided by the mean. The square of this quantity is additive in its various contribution and it's what is used. They experimentally proved the presence of both contribution.
1. Intrinsic and extrinsic noise react rather differently to variation in basic physiological characteristics. Increasing transcriptional rates decreases monotonically intrinsic noise, but instead extrinsic noise shoots up first, then decreases. Regulatory mechanics must handle these sources of noise differently.
1. Something particularly important in the models of intrinsic noise is the number of proteins made form a particular mRNA; this isn't 1, but it's rather distributed according to a geometric distribution (so an exponential) with the mean number of protein produced called b. This is the so-called burst size. It's clear that biggers bursts will amplify variability. Note that b is related purely to translation. (see Thattai and Oudenaarden)
1. Higher transcription rates mean more mRNA, reducing the variation associated with bursts; therefore increasing this rate is a strategy for decreasing noise. Obviously it comes at a cost.
1. Increasing translational rates is not quite as effective, precisely because of the bursty-nature of translation. If anything high transcription rates and low translation rate is the best strategy to achieve noise reduction (many mRNA molecules, but say only one protein produced per mRNA). Of course this make inefficient use of mRNA in turn.
1. Proteins encoding for stress response exhibit higher variation. Why? Would it be possible to plot a phase diagram with strength of environmental fluctuation, protein levels fluctuation and fitness?
1. Marked phenotypic variability allowed by stochasticity is thought of as good at the group level of selection as usual. The usual debate for conditions necessary to allow group selection starts.
1. Noise in signalling. Stress response it itself partially stochastic, at the level of cell-biology this is the field of cell decision-making.
1. Noise can be reduce simply by increasing the number of proteins, but of course there is a metabolic cost to this. This is why gene regulatory circuitry can get pretty sophisticated.
1. mRNA lifetimes are much smaller than protein lifetimes.
1. The entire point of circadian rythms is that they are endogenous types of oscillation, pretty much independent of external conditions. This is already impressive and from the point view of noise it is interesting that they have high levels of fidelity from cycle to cycle. Note that at the same time the set point of such rythm can be reset as time zones prove. Cyrcadian rythms are effectively the building of biological clocks and noise in the field is the problem of their accuracy. Circadian rhythms allow organisms to anticipate and prepare for precise and regular environmental changes. They thus enable organisms to better capitalize on environmental resources (e.g. light and food) compared to those that cannot predict such availability. It has therefore been suggested that circadian rhythms put organisms at a selective advantage in evolutionary terms. However, rhythmicity appears to be as important in regulating and coordinating internal metabolic processes, as in coordinating with the environment. This is suggested by the maintenance (heritability) of circadian rhythms in fruit flies after several hundred generations in constant laboratory conditions, as well as in creatures in constant darkness in the wild, and by the experimental elimination of behavioral, but not physiological, circadian rhythms in quail.
1. Noise is a problem for cell-size as well, as simple stochastic models of cell division imply the necessity of cell size control to avoid infinite size variance.
1. Aging is correlated with increased noise in gene expression.
1. Input noise vs output noise: Tkacic and Bialek distinguish noise at the level of the binding of transcription factor to genes, input noise, to noise at the level of transcription and translation, output noise. This is different from extrinsic and intrinsic as both input and output noise can have both intrinsic and extrinsic noise factors.
